so I'll be talking about brain cancer in
particular but you know the information
that we
this is related to most forms of cancer
and what I what I'd like to do is also
address new approaches that we might be
able to use to provide greater success
for management okay I don't have any
anything to declare
okay so let's let me talk a little bit
now about malignant brain tumors now
these are highly invasive the prognosis
is not good and I said here invasive and
vascular of course this idea of
angiogenesis the vascular ization of the
tumor these kinds of things are
difficult to manage the incidence may be
increasing I don't want to say it is
there's some epidemiological evidence
from cellphone used to suggest that it
might be but this still has to be worked
out what is becoming more and more
recognized is that many of these
malignant tumors especially glioblastoma
are infected with human cytomegalovirus
and I will show you later how we think
this is contributing to the disabled
ization of the metabolic activities
inside these cells and as I think we are
all aware most of the therapies that
have been used are largely ineffective
in providing long term a long term
solution to this problem alright so here
are a few examples of brain tumors know
the whole whole area can be broken down
into two major areas that is the primary
brain tumors and the secondary brain
tumors the primary brain tumors are
those that initiate within the neural
parenchyma itself in the brain itself
GBM glioblastoma multiforme II is I'm
sorry about that okay GBM here you know
it's this is a tumor that you've heard a
lot about recently and
you know people struggling to deal with
this tumor the problem the problem of it
is of course it's usually multicentric
and by the time it's detected many of
the cells have already migrated
throughout the brain so it becomes
surgically not possible to - to cure
this kind of a disease so most of the
treatments are palliative and it's a
it's a tumor mostly in adults that does
happen in children to a much lower
extent but in this case this is a middle
of less normal more common in children
than in adults and it's primarily
involves the cerebellum the very very
deadly kind of disease involves several
surgical - sections but they all can
also can be highly invasive you can see
the size of the cerebellar tumor here
it's quite quite extensive now about 25
percent of all cancer deaths actually
results from metastasis to the brain
from some other organ and this is a
melanoma metastasized to the brain you
know breasts will go to brain colon goes
to brain lung goes to the brain and and
this becomes a real challenge again
you're dealing now with another kind of
invasive cell inside the brain and this
is also has been very difficult to to
deal with now now the big problem here
is as I see it this is a provocative
question is cancer a nuclear genetic
disease or is it a mitochondrial
metabolic disease and it's extremely
important in my mind to to address this
question because it determines and
dictates the strategies the therapeutic
strategies that will be used to manage
the disease now the question comes of
course from the NCI website the National
Cancer Institute website which listed 24
provocative questions to drive cancer
research for the next remainder of the
century and possibly beyond but this
question is not part of that because I
most most textbooks most people think
cancer is a nuclear genetic disease
consequently most of the therapeutic
approaches to this disease have been
focused on nuclear issues gene mutations
and this kind of thing as I said
textbooks you know we teach biology at
Boston College and you can see that in
the freshman biology books that senior
biochemistry books
Vance cell and molecular biology books
cancer is according to the textbook
genetic disease Hanahan and Weinberg
extensive review shows that cancer is a
genetic disease and what they refer to
that basically as a nuclear genetic
problem with mutations and this kind of
thing but the issue is is that manat be
a nuclear genetic disease and merging
evidence is saying that's not now we're
to be the other idea is that whether the
the idea of cancer is a metabolic
disease come from it came from primarily
the work of Otto Warburg in Germany
beginning in the 1920s and he wrote this
paper in 1956 to summarize his lifelong
work summarizing the key aspects of all
cancers basically he said cancer arises
as damage to cellular respiration and as
we know cellular respiration takes place
within the mitochondria of the cell so
cancer is essentially a mitochondrial
kind of disease energy through
fermentation will gradually compensate
for insufficient respiration
if the respiration of the cell is not
compensated for the cell will die so
obviously a cell that cannot up regulate
fermentation pathways will die and never
become a tumor cell so tumor cells have
a transition away from respiration
energy to fermentation energy and
Warburg indicated that this he thought
this would become eventually
irreversible and then the cancer cells
continued to ferment even when oxygen is
presented in the environment the cancer
cells still ferment and this is
indicated by the production of lactic
acid and and you hear a lot about the
Warburg effect this whole thing a big
research area of Warburg you know what
is the Warburg effect you know all the
people targeting the Warburg effect
where did the Warburg effect come from
well Warburg clearly said what the
effect was from the effect was from dis
stabilized energy metabolism through
respiration now this is a very
simplistic answer it's not it's not
acceptable to a large number of
scientists who would like to make this
disease far more complicated than it
actually is the issue is is that we have
a transition a replacement of
respiratory energy with fermentation
energy now this is just a brief very
simplistic overview of the dynamics of
what goes on inside the inside the tumor
cell so you know the majority of the
energy in our cells is coming from the
electron transport chain through
oxidative phosphorylation this
where most of the cells in our body
derived the vast amount of energy to run
the the requirements the metabolic
requirements of the cell much less
energy comes through the cytoplasm
through glycolysis or even through that
the Krebs cycle the TCA through the
suction Eelco a synth a step you can get
some energy from these but you can see
there represents small amounts relative
to the amount from OC's phos and cancer
cells there is a there is a greater
amount of energy from these fermentation
processes these ancient forms of energy
ox foss produces less energy in tumor
cells than normal cells but cancers the
tumor cells have a higher amount of
energy coming from these and I say
ancient these are these are forms of
energy metabolism that existed on the
planet before oxygen came and so the
cancer cells are reverting to some of
this older energy now this simply shows
a standard barrel shape Orthodox picture
of a mitochondrion those little stripes
there those are the cristae the proteins
of the electron transport chain are
enriched in those cristae this is the
diagram of the organelle so and here
this is the mitochondrion of a
glioblastoma multiforme ii showing Chris
pollicis the breakdown of these cristae
many cancer cells not only have
crystallises not a brain cancer many
other kinds of cancer they have fewer
they also have fewer mitochondria now if
you're looking to say well these cristae
contain the proteins for oxidative
phosphorylation and you have an
organelle that doesn't have that
structure structure function it's going
to be very unlikely and it's shown from
our biochemical work and others these
cells are fermenting they're fermenting
because the organelle that's required to
respire is it has the structural defects
there's no known cancer cell that has
normal mitochondria they're either
deficient in numbers or structure or
function or something like this as the
result these cells begin to ferment if
they're going to stay alive so this is
the this is the singular common
metabolic malady of all cancer cells
they ferment to some extent all right so
that now becomes a target for managing
the disease